INTRODUCTION
"Pleadings" is defined under Order VI Rule 1 which states pleading as "written statement" or "plaint". However, the terms plaint and written statement are not defined anywhere in the Civil Procedure Code ("CPC") but plaint can be construed as a document of claim which has the material fact upon which a party (preferably the plaintiff) is relying to establish his/ her case and a written statement is the reply filed against the plaint filed by the plaintiff wherein the defendant establishes some new facts in support of his/her case and refutes the pleadings put forth by the plaintiff. The object of the pleadings is to afford the other side an opportunity to know the case and for the courts to understand the issue at hand.1
There are chances that in the course of the proceedings, an issue arises due to the change in circumstances of the proceedings. Now, in the given set of changes parties cannot rely on their previously filed pleadings but will have to file another one. Just to save parties in this situation and to reduce the multiplicity of the proceedings, the legislature introduced a provision by which parties are allowed to alter or make changes in their already submitted pleadings. This rule is not absolute and parties cannot claim it as a matter of right but what is to be considered here is the gravity of the situation under which a party is claiming the amendment.
This article will delve deeper into the issue of amendment of pleadings, will further look for the changes made to the proviso of Rule 17 in 2002 amendment, will focus upon the wordings of the proviso and conflicting judgment of different High Courts ("HCs") and the Supreme Court ("SC") and ultimately will conclude on the term of the present scenario with respect to the amendment of pleadings vis-à-vis Court's limited discretion to grant the liberty.
ORDER VI RULE 17 AND AMENDMENT OF 1999 & 2002
Order VI Rule 7 ("O.VI R.17") of the CPC defines the procedure for amendment of a pleading in a suit. It empowers the court to accept the application of a party to amend the pleading and simultaneously puts restrictions on the courts to use their discretion to the fullest. The proviso added after the CPC (Amendment) Act, 2002 in R.17 is of utmost importance in this regard which states that courts can use their discretion while allowing the application of amendment when they are fully satisfied that after "due diligence" of the party, they were unable to incorporate the changes they are now seeking by way of amendment.2
The said rule was omitted by the way of amendment of 1999 as there were so many applications being filed to delay the suit proceedings which ultimately furthered the pendency of the cases. The omission was made to shorten the duration of litigation and to speed up the trial. But after sort of agitation from the suffering class of the society, the rule was restored to its original position but now with an additional proviso that empowers the courts to entertain such plea where parties have applied their due diligence but didn't have the opportunity to raise the matter before.
The said amendment of 2002 was challenged in the case of Salem Bar Association, Tamil Nadu v. Union of India,3 there was also a challenge to proviso added to Rule 17. SC upheld the validity of the said rule and stated that the legislature after deleting it through the 1999 amendment has re-inserted it with the intent to minimize or to prevent the frivolous applications which are filed to delay the trial. Also, the said amendment curtails the absolute discretion of the courts to allow amendments at any stage of the suit proceedings.
Similarly, in the case of Chander Kanta Bansal v. Rajinder Singh Anand,4 where the SC emphasized the amendment of 2002 and shed light upon its impact on the amendment of pleadings. The SC in the given case observed that the said amendment was introduced to expedite the proceedings and at the same time by adding a proviso to it, the legislature has tried not to make the procedure, complete estoppel for the parties to make an application for amendment. The object of the proviso is to give limited discretion to the courts and that being the subjective satisfaction of the courts to allow certain amendments to the proceedings. However, the ultimate focus will be on the party claiming such amendment to prove the essentiality, bona fide and to prove that despite due diligence it was inevitable to seek the amendment earlier.5
MEANING OF TRIAL AS INTERPRETED BY COURTS
While interpreting the provision under O.VI R.17 it will be important to focus upon the terms used in the provision. The proviso states that no amendment will be allowed once the trial has been commenced, so, now the focus will be on as to what is the significance of the term "commencement of trial". The views expressed by HCs and SC in the different case laws will be of utmost importance in this regard.
In the case of Kailash v. Nanhku,6 ("Kailash") where the question involves that when does the trial in an election petition commence. SC while answering this question delve into the aspect of commencement of trial in a civil suit and held that once the issues are framed and the case is ready for the recording of evidence then it will be considered as the commencement of trial. SC followed the same principle in the case of Ajendraprasadji N. Pande v. Swami Keshavprakeshdasji,7 where an amendment application was filed by the appellant before the trial court which was rejected on the ground that the trial has already been commenced and the party was not diligent enough. Later on, the matter went to the HC which rejected the appellant's claim on the same ground. SC posed with the question as to what will be considered as the commencement of trial. After observing the facts of the case SC held that commencement of trial depends upon the settlement of issues and when the court is set down for recording of evidence. SC rejected the appellant's claim as the application was filed after the issues were framed and the other party has filed an affidavit for examination of witnesses.
The confusion arises in later judgments where SC itself iterated a different position with respect to the commencement of trial. In the case of Vidyabai v. Padmalatha,8 ("Vidyabai"), the question involves as to what will be considered as "commencement of trial" as in the present case after 2 years of the filing of written statement an application for amendment was moved and by the time, issues were framed and dates had been fixed for cross-examination of witnesses. SC after considering all the aspects held that when the affidavit is filed for examination-in-chief of the witness that will be considered as the commencement of trial and framing of issues will be the first date of hearing.
On a similar footing, many HCs and the SC9 have reiterated the same position. As in the case of Ajit Narsinha v. Nirmala Wamanrao,10 where the issue was related to suit of possession. The petitioner had not given the exact details about his bonafide in the plaint and sought amendment for the same after the issues have already been framed. HC allowed the amendment, set aside the trial court order and held that the trial commences once the affidavit is filed for examination-in-chief of the witness as in the present case there was no such scenario hence amendment allowed. Also, in the case of Sasidharan v. Sundarsanan,11 Kerala HC relied on the judgment of Vidyabai where the matter was pertaining to the title suit of a property and sale deed. Petitioner, however, sought amendment, later on, to delete a relief claimed and to seek alteration in the valuation of the plaint. Kerala HC after perusing all the details observed that the bar under the proviso will be applicable only after the affidavit in lieu of examination-in-chief has been filed and allowed the application as the same situation had not arisen in the case.
The alternative point arises when Calcutta HC in the case of Sree Sree Iswar Radha Beehari Jew v. Malti P. Soni12 while dealing with a situation where an amendment was asked for the correct valuation of the suit and to include some new premises acquired by the defendant. The Calcutta in this case only referred to the legal question involved, i.e., what will be constituted as the "commencement of trial"? The same was answered by observing that the judgment of Kailash is the obiter and the trial will be considered to be commenced when after submitting the affidavit the court first applies its mind and the commencement of cross-examination of the witness begins.
The situation here is doubtful as to what we have to consider as the commencement of trial. As iterated by SC in Vidyabai that commencement of trial would mean the filing of an affidavit for examination-in-chief. The reasoning behind this dictum as discussed by many scholars and in judgments is that filing an affidavit is an instrumental act and this is the first instance in a suit where the court applies its mind to take note of the issue at hand.
SCOPE AND EXTENT OF AMENDMENT: JUDGMENTS DISCUSSING THE POSITION OF LAW
After the 2002 amendment and inclusion of proviso in R.17, SC and the HCs have interpreted the position of the law of the amendment of pleadings. In various instances courts focuses upon the interest of justice rather than the interest of the parties in allowing the amendment. The general rules related to the amendment of pleadings were iterated by the courts many a time. But O.VI R.17 focuses on something which is of greater importance. While granting the chance to amend the pleadings before the trial, the approach taken by the courts is generous however, after the commencement of trial, courts are restricted to allow such applications.
Delhi HC ("DHC") in the case of Inderjeet v. Agricultural Produce Market Committee13 where the appellant seeks amendment to incorporate some additional facts. Respondent opposed it by stating that such an amendment is barred by limitation. DHC while considering the question of whether on what ground an amendment can be sought and can be allowed held that where it is necessary and for the interest of the justice an amendment can be allowed so that the controversy can be fully settled. Similarly, In the case of Saif-ul-Islam Company v. Roshan Lal Arora,14 the DHC faced with the same question where the matter involves a question of second amendment application moved by the plaintiff as some of the facts were not in the knowledge of the plaintiff at the time of seeking the first amendment. Delhi HC took a very liberal view in this regard and allowed the amendment while observing that the real importance of an amendment is to seek real question of the controversy and till the time it is not causing prejudice to the other party it should be allowed. The same ground was reiterated by Kerala HC in the recent case of P.M. Salim v. Vasudevan Namboothiri 15wherein the issue was that whether the willful admission can be withdrawn by way of amendment or not. Kerala HC in this case discusses the position and refused to entertain the amendment application on the ground that such withdrawal through amendment will cause prejudice to the plaintiff and will displace the case of the plaintiff.
In the case of Usha Balasaheb Swami v. Kiran Appasso Swami, ("Usha Balasaheb") the matter was related to partition of a property and an amendment application was filed to debar defendant 3 to 7 from acquiring the suit property as they were illegitimate children. Trial Court rejected the application on the ground that it will ultimately change the nature of the suit and will cause prejudice to the other party. The question here arises that if there is something already admitted in the plaint then can that statement be amended by filing an application. HC answered in negative and SC while allowing the application for amendment held that alteration of pleas, adding new grounds in the pleadings can be allowed to the extent that the said amendment will not hinder the whole judicial process. The line of reasoning given in this case was correct however, the SC went ahead with the bifurcation of amendments of plaint and amendments of the written statement and the procedure related to it, whicto some extent raised a whole new issue in this conundrum.
One of the disputes before the SC in the case of Rajesh Kumar Aggarwal v. K.K. Modi17 was regarding the injunction application filed by the respondent. Later the respondent applied for amendment of pleadings and the same was allowed by the HC. In the appeal, the SC observed the whole proviso of R.17 in two parts and interprets the language of the whole proviso. It was held that the first part of the proviso reflects discretion upon the courts while the second part is imperative and leave the courts with subjective discretion of allowing only those amendments which are necessary for the purpose of carving out the real question involved in the case.
In the case of Revajeetu Builders v. Narayanswamy and Sons,18 ("Revajeetu") where the matter was pertaining to the recovery of some amount and claiming absolute ownership in the scheduled property. For the same, an amendment was sought to delete certain paras and to incorporate some. HC while setting aside the application holds that through amendment a new case will be introduced which will prejudicially affect the other party. SC after perusing a catena of judgments dismiss the application on this very line and laid down the guidelines for the courts to follow which must satisfy before the amendment can be allowed. Apart from the guidelines SC also stated as to what factors should be considered while dealing with the application for amendments.
Similarly, in the case of Mohinder Kumar Mehra v. Roop Rani,19 where the issue was related to sharing in the property which was sold earlier. In this particular case, the issues were framed and the date for recording of evidence was fixed but the plaintiff sought time for producing evidence and later on filed an application for amendment under O.VI R.17. The trial court rejected the application on account of being barred by limitation. HC dismissed the appeal. SC held that at the moment the affidavit was filed it would be constituted as the commencement of trial and held that proviso added to R.17 is of utmost importance as that will be the governing rule to determine whether the amendment application should be entertained or not.
In a recent judgment of T.V. Sasikala v. C.P. Joseph,20 the Kerala HC has iterated its views on the same line. The matter here is related to a suit for declaration of ownership over the property and after commencement of examination of a witness, the plaintiff sought an amendment to its pleadings. The question arose as to on what grounds an amendment application can be allowed? Answering the question, the HC held that before allowing the amendment the court must make sure that the party seeking such amendment has bonafide intentions and satisfy itself that despite the due diligence the party couldn't seek this amendment earlier.
The issue at hand needs to be settled down. SC in many instances has tried to relax the situation with regards to the discretion of the courts. In Revajeetu, SC laid down the guidelines for the courts to make sure the compliance of the proviso of R.17. Similarly, in many instances, SC and even the HCs has reiterated the same position that discretion of the courts has some restrictions and courts are duty-bound to take into account the mandate of the proviso to ensure justice. However, the judgment of SC in Usha Balasaheb where SC differentiated b/w the proviso to be followed in amendments of the plaint and written statements will be the one that will cause the problem as it is going against the O.VI R.1 defining pleadings.
CONCLUSION Given the aforesaid propositions and judgments of the HCs as well as the SC, it can be concluded that the amendment of pleadings cannot be claimed by the party as a matter of right nor can be denied by the Court arbitrarily. However, the discretion to be exercised by the Court is guided by the principles mentioned under the proviso to R.17 and depends on the facts and circumstances of each case. As such O.VI R.17 is intended for promoting the ends of justice and not for defeating them, therefore grant of amendments is the rule and refusal is the exception.
It is in the interest of justice that all the matters connected to a particular suit must be adjudicated in a single suit to avoid multiplicity and for that matter, parties should be at the liberty to alter their pleadings in course of the suit proceedings. While doing so, the onus will be on the courts to adjudicate that whether the amendment has any relation to the said proceedings and it should not have any adverse effect on the suit. However, the issue is still sub-judice as SC in the case of Anita v. Anil21 has recently issued a notice in the SLP filed against the Bombay HC judgment which had followed the dicta of Vidya Bai. It will be a matter of time now when we will get the correct position of law.